Improve multi tenancy documentation (#2620)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/_index.md

### By environment

Separate tenants by deployment environment:

```yaml
- production
- staging  
- development
```

**Use case:** Keep dev/staging data separate from production, apply different retention policies.

### By team or department

Organize tenants around teams:

```yaml
- platform-team
- frontend-team
- backend-team
- data-team
```

**Use case:** Give teams ownership of their data, enable self-service monitoring.

### By service or application

Create separation at the service level:

```yaml
- user-service
- payment-service
- notification-service
- analytics-service
```

**Use case:** Microservices where each service team manages their own monitoring.

### Hybrid approach

Combine strategies using consistent naming:

```yaml
- prod-frontend
- prod-backend
- staging-frontend
- staging-backend
```

**Use case:** Balance granular control with manageable complexity.

### Finding the right balance

Getting the number of tenants right is tricky - too few and you lose isolation benefits, too many and management becomes a headache and it is hard to see the full picture (e.g. can't easily correlate customer requests with CPU usage across services)

**Finding balance:**

> - Start with broad tenants like `production`, `staging`, `development`
> - Split only when teams actually step on each other's toes
> - Ask "will this split help me solve a real problem I have today?"
> - You can always add more tenants later - start simple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Start with broad tenants like `production`, `staging`, `development`
 - Split only when teams actually step on each other's toes
 - Ask "will this split help solve a real problem we have today?"
 - You can always add more tenants later - start simple
```

Separate tenants by deployment environment:

```yaml
- production
- staging  
- development
```

**Use case:** Keep dev/staging data separate from production, apply different retention policies.

### By team or department

Organize tenants around teams:

```yaml
- platform-team
- frontend-team
- backend-team
- data-team
```

**Use case:** Give teams ownership of their data, enable self-service monitoring.

### By service or application

Create separation at the service level:

```yaml
- user-service
- payment-service
- notification-service
- analytics-service
```

**Use case:** Microservices where each service team manages their own monitoring.

### Hybrid approach

Combine strategies using consistent naming:

```yaml
- prod-frontend
- prod-backend
- staging-frontend
- staging-backend
```

**Use case:** Balance granular control with manageable complexity.

### Finding the right balance

Getting the number of tenants right is tricky:

- too few and you lose isolation benefits.
- too many and management becomes a headache and it is hard to see the full picture (for instance it may be harder to correlation customer requests with CPU usage across services).

**Finding balance:**

> - Start with broad tenants like `production`, `staging`, `development`

Author: ```suggestion

- Start with broad tenants like `production`, `staging`, `development`
```

 - Split only when teams actually step on each other's toes
 - Ask "will this split help solve a real problem we have today?"

>  - You can always add more tenants later - start simple

Author: ```suggestion
- Start with broad tenants like `production`, `staging`, `development`
- Split only when teams actually step on each other's toes
- Ask "will this split help solve a real problem we have today?"
- You can always add more tenants later - start simple
```

- You can always add more tenants later - start simple

## Tenant naming best practices

Follow these guidelines when choosing tenant names:

### Naming requirements

Tenant names must follow [Grafana Mimir tenant ID restrictions](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/configure/about-tenant-ids/):

- Alphanumeric characters (a-z, A-Z, 0-9) and special characters (!, -, _, ., *, ', (, ))
- Between 1 and 150 characters
- Can't use: `.`, `..`, `__mimir_cluster`

### Recommended patterns

**Environment-based:** `production`, `staging`, `development`

**Team-based:** `platform-team`, `frontend-team`, `backend-team`

**Service-based:** `user-service`, `payment-service`, `notification-service`

**Hybrid:** `prod-frontend`, `stage-backend`, `dev-notifications`

## Data governance

### Tenant governance

The platform automatically enforces tenant governance to control data ingestion:

- **Valid tenants:** Only tenants referenced in at least one `GrafanaOrganization` can receive data
- **Data rejection:** Data sent to unlisted tenants gets dropped automatically
- **Shared access:** Multiple organizations can reference the same tenant for shared datasets

> ⚠️ **Important:** Removing a tenant from all organizations immediately stops data ingestion for that tenant. Data is stored until it expires.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
⚠️ **Important:** Removing a tenant from all organizations immediately stops data ingestion for that tenant. Data is stored until the retention period expires.```

### Tenant lifecycle management

**Creating tenants:**

1. Define the tenant in `GrafanaOrganization` resource (see [documentation]({{< relref "creating-grafana-organization" >}}))
2. Configure data collection to use tenant label (see [Data Ingestion documentation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/data-ingestion" >}}))
3. Verify data appears in organization dashboards (see [Data Exploration documentation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/data-exploration" >}}))

**Removing tenants:**

1. Stop sending data to the tenant

> 2. Remove tenant from all `GrafanaOrganization` resources (data will be kept until the end of the retention period)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Remove tenant from all `GrafanaOrganization` resources (data will be kept until the retention period expires)
```

Separate tenants by deployment environment:

```yaml
- production
- staging  
- development
```

**Use case:** Keep dev/staging data separate from production, apply different retention policies.

### By team or department

Organize tenants around teams:

```yaml
- platform-team
- frontend-team
- backend-team
- data-team
```

**Use case:** Give teams ownership of their data, enable self-service monitoring.

### By service or application

Create separation at the service level:

```yaml
- user-service
- payment-service
- notification-service
- analytics-service
```

**Use case:** Microservices where each service team manages their own monitoring.

### Hybrid approach

Combine strategies using consistent naming:

```yaml
- prod-frontend
- prod-backend
- staging-frontend
- staging-backend
```

**Use case:** Balance granular control with manageable complexity.

### Finding the right balance

Getting the number of tenants right is tricky:

- too few and you lose isolation benefits.
- too many and management becomes a headache and it is hard to see the full picture (for instance it may be harder to correlation customer requests with CPU usage across services).

**Finding balance:**

>  - Split only when teams actually step on each other's toes

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: Multi-tenancy
description: Understanding multi-tenancy concepts and best practices for the Observability Platform.
weight: 20
menu:
  principal:
    parent: tutorials-observability
    identifier: tutorials-observability-multitenancy
last_review_date: 2025-06-11
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
user_questions:
  - How to isolate data in the observability platform?
  - What are tenant separation best practices?
  - How do tenants and organizations work together?
---

The observability platform supports multi-tenancy to help you isolate data and control access across different teams, environments, or projects. This guide explains the core concepts and best practices for implementing tenant separation.

## Understanding multi-tenancy

Multi-tenancy works through three key components:

### Tenants

A **tenant** is a logical namespace that isolates observability data (metrics, logs) in the backend storage systems (Mimir and Loki). When applications send data, they include a tenant label that determines where the information goes.

**Key characteristics:**

> - Complete data isolation at the storage level

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

- Complete data isolation at the storage level
```

```yaml
# Platform Team Organization
tenants:
- platform-team
```

**Best for:** Complete team isolation, clear ownership.

#### One-to-many mapping
```yaml
# Engineering Organization
tenants:
- frontend-team
- backend-team
- platform-team
```

**Best for:** Cross-team collaboration, shared dashboards.

### RBAC role assignment

Assign roles based on user needs:

```yaml
rbac:
  admins:
  - customer:platform-admin      # Full access to organization
  editors:
  - customer:senior-engineer     # Can create/edit dashboards and alerts
  viewers:
  - customer:junior-engineer     # Read-only access to dashboards
```

## Data governance

### Tenant governance

The platform automatically enforces tenant governance to control data ingestion:

- **Valid tenants:** Only tenants referenced in at least one `GrafanaOrganization` can receive data
- **Data rejection:** Data sent to unlisted tenants gets dropped automatically
- **Shared access:** Multiple organizations can reference the same tenant for shared datasets

⚠️ **Important:** Removing a tenant from all organizations immediately stops data ingestion for that tenant.

### Tenant lifecycle management

**Creating tenants:**

> 1. Define tenant in `GrafanaOrganization` resource

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

1. Define the tenant in `GrafanaOrganization` resource
```

2. Configure data collection to use tenant label
3. Verify data appears in organization dashboards

**Removing tenants:**

> 1. Stop sending data to the tenant

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

1. Stop sending data to the tenant
```

---
title: Multi-tenancy

> description: Understanding multi-tenancy concepts and best practices for the Observability Platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: How multi-tenancy works in the Observability Platform and best practices.
```

This doc also shows a lot how to do and configure things which IMO should be kept for the `Step-by-step guide`

weight: 20
menu:
  principal:
    parent: tutorials-observability
    identifier: tutorials-observability-multitenancy
last_review_date: 2025-06-11
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
user_questions:
  - How to isolate data in the observability platform?
  - What are tenant separation best practices?
  - How do tenants and organizations work together?
---

The observability platform supports multi-tenancy to help you isolate data and control access across different teams, environments, or projects. This guide explains the core concepts and best practices for implementing tenant separation.

## Understanding multi-tenancy

Multi-tenancy works through three key components:

### Tenants

> A **tenant** is a logical namespace that isolates observability data (metrics, logs) in the backend storage systems (Mimir and Loki). When applications send data, they include a tenant label that determines where the information goes.

Author: ```suggestion
A **tenant** is a logical namespace that isolates observability data (metrics, logs) in the backend storage systems (Mimir and Loki). When applications send (or retrieve) data, they include a tenant label that determines where the information goes (or is fetched from).
```

**Key characteristics:**

> - Complete data isolation at the storage level

Reviewer: Maybe "complete" is too much. It's currently all in one common bucket.
```suggestion
- Data isolation at the storage level
```

- Independent retention policies and limits
- Separate query scope for dashboards and alerts

### Grafana organizations

> A **Grafana organization** gives you access to specific tenants through dedicated datasources and dashboards. Each organization is a separate workspace in Grafana with its own:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A **Grafana organization** gives you access to specific tenants through dedicated datasources. Each organization is a separate workspace in Grafana with its own:
```

Author: Dashboards are also organisation scoped

- User roles and permissions
- Dashboards and folders
- Datasource configurations

> - Alert rules and notification channels

Reviewer: Alert rules and alertmanager config are more related to tenants than organizations I think?

Author: Makes sense. Do you mind providing a suggestion for this?

Author: ```suggestion
```

### RBAC groups

**RBAC groups** from your identity provider (like Active Directory or OAuth) define which users get access to specific Grafana organizations and their permission levels.

## Tenant separation strategies

Choose the right strategy based on your needs:

### By environment

Separate tenants by deployment environment:

```yaml
tenants:
- production
- staging  
- development
```

**Use case:** Keep dev/staging data separate from production, apply different retention policies.

### By team or department

Organize tenants around teams:

```yaml
tenants:
- platform-team
- frontend-team
- backend-team
- data-team
```

> **Use case:** Give teams ownership of their data, enable self-service monitoring.

Author: Do you want to pair on it next week? I do think it makes sense but I would not know how to start

### By service or application

Create separation at the service level:

```yaml
tenants:
- user-service
- payment-service
- notification-service
- analytics-service
```

**Use case:** Microservices where each service team manages their own monitoring.

### Hybrid approach

Combine strategies using consistent naming:

```yaml
tenants:
- prod-frontend
- prod-backend
- staging-frontend
- staging-backend
```

**Use case:** Balance granular control with manageable complexity.

## Tenant naming best practices

Follow these guidelines when choosing tenant names:

### Naming requirements

Tenant names must follow [Grafana Mimir tenant ID restrictions](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/configure/about-tenant-ids/):

- Alphanumeric characters (a-z, A-Z, 0-9) and special characters (!, -, _, ., *, ', (, ))
- Between 1 and 150 characters
- Can't use: `.`, `..`, `__mimir_cluster`

### Recommended patterns

**Environment-based:** `production`, `staging`, `development`

**Team-based:** `platform-team`, `frontend-team`, `backend-team`

**Service-based:** `user-service`, `payment-service`, `notification-service`

**Hybrid:** `prod-frontend`, `stage-backend`, `dev-notifications`

> ## Access control patterns

Reviewer 2: This section is a duplicate and less informative version of `Creating a Grafana organization` section, I think this should be removed here as this doc is only about the how things works and not how to do it.
How to name tenant was already covered in the previous section.

### Organization-to-tenant mapping

Map Grafana organizations to tenants based on your access needs:

#### One-to-one mapping

```yaml
# Platform Team Organization
tenants:
- platform-team
```

**Best for:** Complete team isolation, clear ownership.

#### One-to-many mapping

```yaml
# Engineering Organization
tenants:
- frontend-team
- backend-team
- platform-team
```

**Best for:** Cross-team collaboration, shared dashboards.

### RBAC role assignment

Assign roles based on user needs:

```yaml
rbac:
  admins:
  - customer:platform-admin      # Full access to organization
  editors:
  - customer:senior-engineer     # Can create/edit dashboards and alerts
  viewers:
  - customer:junior-engineer     # Read-only access to dashboards
```

## Data governance

### Tenant governance

The platform automatically enforces tenant governance to control data ingestion:

- **Valid tenants:** Only tenants referenced in at least one `GrafanaOrganization` can receive data
- **Data rejection:** Data sent to unlisted tenants gets dropped automatically
- **Shared access:** Multiple organizations can reference the same tenant for shared datasets

> ⚠️ **Important:** Removing a tenant from all organizations immediately stops data ingestion for that tenant.

Author: ```suggestion
⚠️ **Important:** Removing a tenant from all organizations immediately stops data ingestion for that tenant. Data is stored until it expires.
```

### Tenant lifecycle management

**Creating tenants:**

> 1. Define the tenant in `GrafanaOrganization` resource
> 2. Configure data collection to use tenant label
> 3. Verify data appears in organization dashboards

Reviewer: This calls for some documentation links.
```suggestion
1. Define the tenant in `GrafanaOrganization` resource (see [documentation](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/creating-grafana-organization/))
2. Configure data collection to use tenant label (see [Data Ingestion documentation](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/data-ingestion/))
3. Verify data appears in organization dashboards (see [Data Exploration documentation](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/data-exploration/)
```

**Removing tenants:**

1. Stop sending data to the tenant
2. Wait for retention period to expire

> 3. Remove tenant from all `GrafanaOrganization` resources

Reviewer 2: Same remark on having detailed steps either in a single page or linked pages.
We also can't ask use to just sit there and wait for the retention period to expires, we can at best explain that data will be permanently deleted once the retention period expires, we also need to mention or link to a doc on what is the current retention period.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Stop sending data to the tenant
2. Remove tenant from all `GrafanaOrganization` resources (data will be kept until the end of the retention period)
```
